CPS-0022? | Lost Stake (#1060)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CPS-0022/README.md

---
CPS: 22
Title: Lost Stake
Category: Ledger
Status: Open
Authors:
    - Ryan Wiley <rian222@gmail.com>
Proposed Solutions: []

> Discussions:

Reviewer: my apologies for also missing that one 😬

---

## Use Cases

The motivation for addressing lost stake and lost ADA is grounded in preserving fairness, efficiency, and the long-term health of Cardano’s proof-of-stake and governance mechanisms. At present, the problem may seem minor or largely theoretical, as lost ADA is not immediately visible on a small scale. But the impact compounds over time, and proactive understanding is crucial.

**Figure 2** below illustrates a hypothetical projection of the growth of lost ADA if left unchecked:

<img src="fig2.jpg" alt="Figure 2: Hypothetical exponential growth of lost ADA over time." width="100%" />

> > **Figure 2:** Hypothetical exponential growth of lost ADA over time, based on an assumed *conservative* 1.5% of ADA being lost per year (versus the 4% annual loss observed in Bitcoin), a 70% ratio of staked ADA, and a 3% annual staking-reward compounding. The blue curve (Lost ADA) shows the cumulative lost principal, while the red curve (Lost ADA + compounded rewards) shows how those lost funds are expected to grow with staking rewards, eventually representing a large fraction of total supply over decades.

Reviewer 2: It is unclear to me from this figure is why a static 3% APY is used in this projection, while rewards APY is projected to diminish over time well below that number.

Also, as mentioned earlier SPO retirement does remove such stake out of circulation.
This figure assume static SPOs for many decades to come, which isn't necessarily reflective of real life. If anything, stake pools are operated by real people who also have limited life spans. I think it would be worth at least mentioning the fact that some portion of the "lost stake" will naturally be removed or even better look at history how often stake pools retire with what proportion of total stake in order to attempt to do a more realistic projection in this figure.

Author: @lehins that 3% APY was a compromise between the previous 8% yield from early Shelly which has been compounding for longer, and also with the expectation that future things will be done to increase rewards such as Partner Chain AVS.  If the community does nothing to increase rewards, then the model has the estimate around 0.6% by 2030, which is likely unsustainable and another problem entirely.

SPO retirement does indeed remove stake from circulation, an SPO with large amounts of immobile, lost stake is incentivized NOT to retire.  Even if their performance is poor or they are acting maliciously, by definition that stake will stay with them.  Additionally, with the model's projections it is likely that the problem will be quite bad within the lifetime of a single human who operates a stake pool.  And even then there's the possibility/likelihood of it being passed on.

As far as other methods of estimating or projecting lost stake, we also looked at...
- Residual stake left in pools after they retire
- Counting rewards (account) balances in wallets that have not had activity in X amount of time.
- Counting eligible wallets that don't claim their $NIGHT airdrop

The issue is that each of those things is a lot of extra (unpaid) work and at best they are only rough estimates as well.  We think it is more important to at least conclude that the problem exists even if we can't quantify the magnitude of it.

I do think our biggest saving grace for this problem is the existence of a saturation cap on each pool that sets on upper limit on lost rewards compounding infinitely.  But that is also very hard to estimate or model without a way to actually identify lost stake on chain.

## Problem

Lost Stake continues to earn and compound staking rewards and carries voting weight despite being permanently inaccessible.  Even though the funds are gone for good, the ledger continues to treat them as live stake. They keep:

• earning a proportional share of every epoch’s rewards,  
• compounding themselves through those rewards, and  
• exerting voting weight whenever their chosen dRep participates.  

“Lost delegation” may be a more technically correct phrase since it is the delegation certificate that survives, but we will use the more familiar term "Lost Stake" to stay consistent with community vocabulary around Sticky Stake.

**Figure 1** (below) visualises these relationships with overlapping circles:

<img src="fig1.jpg" alt="Figure 1: Circles depict the Total Rewards Pot and its diminishing share with some rewards also flowing to Sticky Stake and Lost Stake addresses every epoch." width="50%" />

> **Figure 1:** Circles depict the Total Rewards Pot and its diminishing share with some rewards also flowing to Sticky Stake and Lost Stake addresses every epoch.

> Cardano already distributes a significant amount of ADA every epoch in staking rewards to addresses that are permanently inaccessible. This occurs when ADA is lost, such as when a holder loses their seed phrase or passes away without sharing their keys, rendering the funds permanently unreachable. In most other cryptocurrencies, lost coins simply exit circulation. For example, it is estimated that around 20% of all Bitcoin supply is lost forever [[investopedia.com](https://www.investopedia.com/tech/how-much-bitcoin-has-been-lost/)], with more granular analyses by Ledger Academy and Chainalysis both converging on roughly 4% of all Bitcoin being lost each year [[ledger.com](https://www.ledger.com/academy/topics/economics-and-regulation/how-many-bitcoin-are-lost-ledger); [chainalysis.com](https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/money-supply/)].

Author: The Ledger.com link worked fine for me, but the Investopedia link was broken.  I just updated the link and pushed the commit.

It is important to formally document the lost-stake problem now, even before it becomes visibly acute, because the Cardano community needs a clear understanding of the issue’s scope and implications.

### Why the Protocol Behaves This Way

Cardano’s ledger does not distinguish between active and inactive stake. All ADA is treated equally under the consensus rules. This design choice (common to many PoS systems) avoids complexity and respects the principle that tokens are the bearer’s property indefinitely. However, the unintended consequence is that there is no built-in mechanism to recognize or mitigate lost keys. From a protocol perspective, lost ADA is indistinguishable from a perfectly content long-term holder. Any potential solution must therefore carefully balance improving incentives with respecting property rights and avoiding false positives (e.g., not seizing or disabling legitimately held ADA).

### Current Mitigations and Their Limits

> As noted earlier, governance proposals like [CIP-1694](https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip1694/) include measures to limit the impact of inactive delegated stake on voting outcomes. These measures (such as marking inactive dReps) help prevent governance paralysis, but do not address the underlying issue of lost ADA still existing and, in some cases, continuing to accumulate rewards. However, when a stake pool with lost stake retires or shuts down, the lost ADA delegated to it is actually much less of a problem. That ADA effectively becomes undelegated and removed from circulation, meaning it no longer receives staking rewards or participates in governance. While the system currently has no direct way to reclaim or reassign lost ADA, the most persistent issues arise when lost stake remains delegated to active pools or dReps. Indirect mitigations only address symptoms (like governance quorum) rather than the root cause.

Reviewer 3: maybe worth noting that
because DRep delegation is new (and requires the use of private keys)
all previously lost stake is unable to delegate to DReps
which likely means that lost stake will have less of an impact on DRep voting power

### Why Ignoring the Problem Is Risky

Some might argue that lost coins simply increase the value of the remaining ones (through scarcity) or that the effect is negligible for now. However, as the projections show, the effect is not static. It grows over time and can reach levels that materially impact network operation. Unlike in Bitcoin (where lost coins arguably don’t harm network security or functionality [[investopedia.com](https://www.investopedia.com/tech/how-much-bitcoin-has-been-lost/)]), in Cardano most lost coins still participate in consensus. Therefore, ignoring lost stake and lost ADA means accepting a slow-growing skew in the system that could ultimately undermine user trust and network performance. Early recognition allows for carefully researched, minimally disruptive solutions before the problem becomes too large and contentious to fix.

> ---

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- **Economic Sustainability:** In the long term, as block-reward inflation tapers off, Cardano’s security will hinge on transaction fees and community participation. If a significant chunk of ADA is effectively out of economic circulation (yet still “consuming” rewards/fees), it means the active economy has to carry that burden. The security budget (total incentives for validators) would be partially drained to non-participants. This inefficiency will necessitate higher fees or protocol changes to compensate, which is undesirable for growth. In short, allowing lost stake and lost ADA to grow unchecked may undermine the sustainability of the network’s incentive model.

## Open Questions 

> - How can the protocol reliably identify truly lost stake keys?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- How can the protocol reliably identify truly lost credentials?
```
worth capturing all types of credential

- What inactivity period (epochs/years) would be acceptable before stake is considered “lost”?

> - Which economic / social mechanisms can prevent reward dilution without violating property rights?

Author: What was the exact promise though? Is there somewhere we can reference it so that we can work around it?

If it's just an implicit promise for anybody who signed a delegation transaction, then where do we draw the line? Is it a promise that the protocol would never change other than the exact things that were declared on the roadmap?

If so, then IMHO we've already broken it in worse ways.  Consider the hard requirement to select a dRep to withdraw your staking rewards.  The difference between this and that:

"You no longer earn any new staking rewards unless you do X"

vs.

"You can longer access staking rewards that are ALREADY YOURS unless you do X"

> - Which economic / social mechanisms can prevent reward dilution without violating property rights?

Reviewer 3: > If it's just an implicit promise for anybody who signed a delegation transaction, then where do we draw the line?

100% you're right
it was/is a implicit promise

v good examples to the contrary
